Let's talk about derivatives.
This is a major topic in calculus and in fact a first semester course in calculus might spend one half
or maybe even close to the entire semester just talking about derivatives.
So obviously I'm not going to do it.
Total justice just in the next five minutes or so.
Nonetheless I will tell you a little bit about what a derivative means.
A couple of different ways of indicating the derivative and doing it in latex.
And of course how to compute derivatives in simple.
And most importantly I will show you how to use python as a tool for understanding concepts in calculus
in particular the derivatives of products and sums.
So here you see two functions.
These are not derivatives.
These are functions that you have encountered in the past few videos in this section of the course.
Now when you look at a graph like this that shows you the value of the function at each value of X but
for a derivative we don't actually care about the value of the function itself.
What we care about is how the function is changing over time.
So notice that here the function is decreasing with increasing x.
So I call this time I often think about these as functions of time but of course this dimension doesn't
have to be time.
But anyway notice the function is decreasing as it goes to the right.
So therefore the derivative here is going to be negative here it's decreasing slowly it's gradually
going down.
So the derivative will be negative but small.
And here the function is going down really really fast.
So the derivative is going to be negative and large.
And here is an interesting case because the function itself is positive but it's still going downhill.
So the derivative is actually still negative here even though the function itself is positive.
All right.
So there's a lot to learn about derivatives in this video.
I'm going to tell you the rule for computing the derivative of a polynomial.
Let's start with a few examples.
So first of all a derivative is often indicated using this notation so d divided by D X. Sometimes It's
written D F over d x and it's often said D by D X..
So you would pronounce this object here as d by D X. So the D is for the derivative or the differential.
So the derivative of x squared is two times X to the power of one of course this one is implicit.
You could also drop this.
So let's raise this to a higher power the derivative of x two the three is three times X squared.
I wonder if you're starting to notice a pattern here.
Let's look at one more example.
Let's start from the function three times x cubed and there the derivative is nine times X squared.
So I hope you can start seeing the pattern here.
In fact there is a specific rule for computing the derivative of a polynomial.
And that rule looks like this.
So a times X to the power of n where a is some coefficient.
So it's just a number like here a would be equal to three and then the derivative is.
You still get eight times n but now in the power you're n hour sorry eight times x.
But in the power you have and minus one and then the n comes up frontier and multiplies the a let's
switch to Python and see how this gets implemented as we often do in these videos we are going to be
using simply num pi map plot lib and display and math for the latex printing.
So let's start by importing a or creating a symbolic variable X and then I'm gonna say F of X equals
X squared.
It's a pretty simple function.
Now I write simple diff that is the simplify function for computing the derivative it's for diff because
on computers or in discrete numbers we often think of the derivative as being a difference the differential.
Okay.
So we get the answer of 2 x as I indicated in these slides.
Now I want to show you how to indicate the derivative using LaTeX.
In mathematics there are several different notations for indicating the derivative.
And I'm going to show you three of the most commonly used ones.
So one comes from lightning so it's called Lightning s notation and all these different notations are
named after famous mathematicians who were really important for the development of calculus.
So that looks like this display math.
And then we have f of x equals percent s and let me just start off by filling in some of these details.
So this is gonna be some latex F of X..
Okay.
So we see F of X equals X squared.
And now I want to write with a bit of a space here.
So quad.
Now I'm gonna write the likeness notation which is what I showed you in these slides already.
So that is def over the X and sometimes the f is omitted here but D F by D X equals percent s.
And now we have to add another substitution and that is going to be the late tech version of Sim that
def f and actually you know I'm gonna be using this quite often.
So it's probably a good idea to make this be a variable.
I'm going to call this D F X equals the derivative of F of X.
So that will simplify this code a little bit by the way you notice I had one parentheses too many here
and you see that Python colors it in red.
So that lets me know that there is one too many parentheses at the end.
Of course I have to run this code first and now.
Okay.
Now this looks good so we see F of X equals X squared.
The derivative of x or of f of x equals two X.
Okay.
So this is the life and its notation.
And then we also have another one called low branch notation and that one is basically the same.
It looks a little bit different.
Now it's important to realize that the actual derivatives are always the same we're not computing the
derivatives any differently.
This is just about commonly used notation for indicating the derivative.
So the Lagouranis notation is to put a single quote After the function and that indicates the derivative.
However a single quote in Python is actually used to demarcate these strings.
So we use a slash quote.
And notice the colouring here.
So without the slash Python actually thinks that this goes outside the string and then all of this stuff
is in another string which we haven't actually closed with another single apostrophe.
So use the slash operator as like an escape character to let Python know that the next character is
going to be something special.
So let's see how this looks.
Okay.
So that looks like this.
You can see it's a little bit more compact compared to this notation.
And people often would pronounce this as prime so you would say F prime equals to X or the derivative
of F for F prime.
Okay so that's the Lagrange notation.
And the last thing that I'm going to show you is called Newton notation.
Newton notation.
So this is very pan-European here we have the German notation the French notation and then we get to
the English notation.
So now the Newton notation has the F with with dots on top of it.
And that gets indicated using dot and then an F. Scott
like this though it's a little bit harder to see what you can see there is a dot on top of the F and
that's indicated in latex.
Using this function slash dot.
Now in practice I think you see this new note Newton notation less often in mathematics and in engineering
and I think that's mainly because it's just a little harder to see you know.
Is this really a dot.
Or is there just a little smudge on your laptop screen anyway.
But certainly the life knits and Lagrange notations you will see pretty often.
All right.
So that's for indicating a derivative using LaTeX and python.
And what I want to introduce you to now is generating plots of a function and its derivative in simple.
So I'm going to be using some simple function some simple plotting functions that I haven't used a whole
lot in the course although I have introduced you to these functions.
And this simple approach to plotting in the function on graphics.
So I'm going to be frequently using simplified dot plotting dot plots.
Now this is quite a lot to write out so therefore I'm going to simplify my life a little bit by writing.
Import simple.
Dot plotting that plot as Sim plot.
So now I can just write Simplot and that will be a shortcut for all of this business okay.
So I'm going to come up with a different function.
This is going to be three minus X cubed and let's see what this function looks like and what its derivative
looks like.
So let's first generate the plot of the function on its own so I will say Simplot the function.
And then the second input you might remember was the variable and the range.
So let's go from minus five to plus five.
And I'm going to say show equals false and then actually I'm going to immediately show the function
here.
So it might seem a little weird to have this show equals false and then show here but I'm going to be
filling this out with more options here.
All right.
So here you see what this function looks like.
This is 3 minus X cubed.
So you see the minus X cubed here and this three is essentially just shifting it a little bit.
Now I want to add another plot to this.
So p that extend and I'm going to extend this plot by also plotting Sim plot the derivative of the function
which is simple dot diff of effects and then again I need to specify the variable and the range although
actually this isn't really totally necessary because it added on to this plot.
So we will just inherit the variable and the limits from the above plot.
But anyway and then still show equals false.
Okay.
So let's see what this looks like.
Mm hmm.
Well I mean we already made this plot of F of X 4 so I know that this is the main function and this
is the derivative but it would be nice to have these be two different line colors.
So I'm going to specify that the second plot object which is the derivative has a line color equal to
let's go for red.
Keep things simple.
And now of course we need to add some legends.
So p zero dark label equals and I'm gonna say using a dollar sign for Python coding.
F of X equals percent.
S and then replace that with Sim later back of the function.
So that was for the first plot object and then we get the second plot object and that was seemed like
it and then the sim that diff and I suppose at this point I probably could have also created a variable
for the derivative of the function.
But that's okay let's see.
So now I need to activate the legend so make the legend true.
And now this is looking pretty good except I would like to zoom into this function a little bit more
so I'm going to indicate the ranges.
So p that y Lim equals Let's go.
Well it's hard to know exactly what it should be let's try minus 10 two plus 10 all right.
This is looking good.
I think all this is a pretty good zoom although now you can see the x axis you know most of the action
on the x axis is happening from let's say minus three to plus three.
Maybe I'll change these boundaries here to three and three and I think I'll even just delete this altogether.
Let's see how this looks.
Huh.
Okay.
Well I still need to change the pitot X limb here.
So let's get this from minus three to plus three.
Okay.
So this is looking interesting and like I said in this slide it's pretty interesting to see that although
the function is positive here the function is moving negative so therefore the derivative is negative.
However this function is slowing down so it's not moving negatively so fast.
So therefore the derivative is actually getting larger.
Here are the function doesn't move at all on the y axis.
So there is this point here where the function is going straight across.
On the exact on the y axis and therefore the derivative touches zero and then the function starts going
negative more and more steeply.
So the derivative is also becoming more and more negative I discussed the derivative and in particular
derivatives of polynomials and you saw how to indicate the derivative and how to compute the derivative
using LaTeX and simple.
Don't go away in the next video there's going to be an exercise and there you will get to use python
as a tool to help you understand a couple of important rules about the derivatives of multiple functions.